# Provable security

NB: In research often interactive turing machines as model rather than libraries.

### Chaining lemma

If L_l, L_r with L_l =~ L_r, then:

L* x L_l =~ L* x L_r forall libraries L*

#### Proof

A arbitrary program which accesses L*.

P[A x (L* x L_l) => 1] = P[(A x L*) x L_l => 1] # A* := (A x L*) is new distinguishing algorithm
                       = P[(A x L*) x L_r => 1]
                       = P[A x (L* x L_r) => 1]

Hence L* x L_l =~ L* x L_r

### Security proofs

- Construct sequences of libraries st each two are interchangable
- Intermediate ones are called "hybrids"
- Exploit exchangability of libraries

```
# Composition 1: Hybrid_1

L_x:
  Eavesdrop(m_l, m_r):
    c := ctxt(m_l)
    return c

L_(ots-$-real):
  CTXT(m):
    k <- Sigma.KeyGen
    c <- Sigma.Enc(k, m)
    return c


# Composition 2: Hybrid_2

L_y:
  Eavesdrop(m_l, m_r):
    c := ctxt(m_r)
    return c

L_(ots-$-rand): as above, random cipher text


# Composition 3: Hybrid_3

L_z:
  Eavesdrop(m_l, m_r):
    c := ctxt(m_r)
    return c

L_(ots-$-rand): as above, random cipher text


# Composition 4: Hybrid_4

L_a:
  Eavesdrop(m_l, m_r):
    c := ctxt(m_r)
    return c

L_(ots-$-real): as above
```

# 4 Security from intractable computations

With OTS: Even with infinite computational time it would be impossible to
derive the correct plaintext (assuming no unique structure in the plaintext
which allows identification)

keylength.com => Comparison of which keys hold how long against which adversaries.

## Tractability

Anything computable in probabilistic polynomial time.

Note: Probabilistic to also allow probabilistic algorithms, rather than only
deterministic ones. Randomness needed to make crypto, so should also be
available to adversaries.

Implies that NP-complete problems are not sufficient for secure cryptography.
Rather crypto problems need to be hard to solve for the adversary *most* of the
time.

## Computational security

Based on difficulty of intractable computation ("hard problems"). Basis of
modern cryptology.

### Security parameter lambda

Lambda quantifies computational effort of an attack and the security of an
algorithm.

Ideally we would like the cost of an attack to be ~ 2^lambda, and cost of
implementation ~ poly(lambda) or, even better, ~lambda.

#### Example: AES-128

Uses 128 bit keys. A hacker would need to perform 2^128 operations.

### Formalizing "efficiently"

According to complexity theory, we consider everything computable in
probabilistic polynomial time (= tractable) to be efficient.

NB: In complexity theory, when based on turing machine, complexity is measured
in p(lambda) steps, with lambda length of input. ("Polynomial in length of
input tape").

Ex:
  - lambda^2 polynomial
  - 2^(log(lambda)^10) super-polynomial (not polynomial)
  - 1.1^lambda exponential (not polynomial)
  - lambda^1000000 polynomial (even if not practical)

### Formalizing negligible probabilities

- Adversary can always guess lambda-bit secret key with probability 2^-lambda
- Adversary can repeat a guess p(lambda) times, and achieve probability leq
  p(lambda) * 2^-lambda, which should still be negligible

- 2^-lambda negligible
- 1/(1.1 lambda) negligible
- lambda^-1000 not negligible

### Def

For functions p() and q() we write:

P ~~ q if |p - q| = |p(lambda) - q(lambda)| is negligible.

Editor's note: ~~ = two stacked ~, "approximately"

Extending the notation to probabilities:
P[epsilon] ~~ 0: Event epsilon almost never occurs
P[epsilon] ~~ 1: Event epsilon almost surely / certainly / with overwhelming probability occurs
P[A] ~~ P[B]: A and B have essentially the same probability

## Indistinguishability

- Interchangable libraries produce same probability distribution
- Indistinguishable libraries produce essentially th same probabilibyt distribution
  - Cannot be distinguished with more than negligible probability in probabilistic polynomial time
