# 7 Security against chosen-plaintext attacks

Remember:
plaintext -- (enc) --> ciphertext -- (dec) --> ...

- Chosen-plaintext attack: Plaintext influenced, ciphertext known, by attacker
- Known-plaintext attack: Plaintext and ciphertext known by attacker
- Ciphertext-only attack: Ciphertext known by attacker
- Chosen-ciphertext attack: Attacker influences ciphertext and sends to
  decrypter, observes feedback (eg response time or content)

Increase in adversarial power for public-key cryptography: known-plaintext, chosen-plaintext, chosen-ciphertext
  - As: Everyone can encrypt, but ciphertext can not be chosen freely

For symmetric encryption:
- No direct relation between chosen-plaintext and chosen-ciphertext, but all
  which are secure to chosen-ciphertext are secure to chosen-plaintext

## One-time security

- Not very useful as key chosen anew every encryption call
- Relax this as follows

## Security against chosen-plaintext attacks

Notion 'cpa':
An encryption scheme Sigma is secure against chosen-plaintext attacks, if the
following two libraries are indistinguishable:

```
L^Sigma_CPA-Left:

k <- {0, 1}^lambda
EAVESDROP(m_l, m_r):
  if |m_l| != |m_r|:
    return nil

  return Sigma.enc(k, m_l)


L^Sigma_CPA-Right:

k <- {0, 1}^lambda
EAVESDROP(m_l, m_r):
  if |m_l| != |m_r|:
    return nil

  return Sigma.enc(k, m_l)
```

### Note 1

Lengths must be equal, to allow Sigma to be used for plaintexts of different
lengths: `Sigma.M = {0, 1}^*`

If this was not given, all outputs would have to be "bloated" to fixed lengths,
to prevent giving away information. This would impose limits on maximum input
lengths and not be practical for small inputs

If one wants to hide the existence of messages -> Steganography. (Concealing
information within another type of information eg an image)

### Note 2

Often called IND-CPA (indistinguishale chosen-plaintext-attack) security.

### Note 3

Almost same notion for public-key cryptography.

### Lemma

CPA-secure encryption scheme cannot be deterministic.

#### Proof:

Suppose it was deterministic. Then:

```
c_x := EAVESDROP(x, x)
c_y := EAVESDROP(x, y)

return c_x == c_y
```

Would be able to distinguish with advantage 1. (As two different ciphertexts
have to produce different plaintexts to satisfy the requirement of being
decryptable)

Hence we need probabilistic encryption.

## Making non-deterministic encryption

### 1) Stateful encryption

- Keep state inside Sigma.Enc (eg counter).
- Complex to implement
- Need to reconstruct state on receiver side, synchronization between
  encryption and decryption needed

### 2) Randomization in encryption algorithm

- Sigma.Enc uses randomness r
- R becomes part of ciphertext -> increases length
- Most popular option

### 3) Nonce-based encryption

- Each call to Sigma.Enc has to supply a nonce in addition.
- Nonce: Number used only for one call to Sigma.Enc
- Caller has to get this nonce via 1) state or 2) randomization

## Pseudorandom ciphertext

Notion 'cpa$':
Often more useful than indistinguishability ('cpa') mentioned above.

NB: Notation '$' here refers to a coin (dollar) flip

### Def cpa$

An encryption scheme Sigma has pseudorandom ciphertexts against
chosen-plaintext attacks if the following two libraries are indistinguishable:

```
L_cpa$-real:
  k <- {0, 1}^lambda
  CTXT(m):
    c := Sigma.Enc(k, m)
    ret c


L_cpa$-rand
  CTXT(m):
    # Pick random ciphertext such that length of ciphertext correlates with 
    # length of message
    r <- Sigma.C | |r| ~ |m|
    return r
```

### Lemma

CPA$-security => CPA-security
Reverse does not hold!

#### Proof: In book (respectively in exercise)

### cpa$-secure encryption from a PRF

Idea: Use F(k, r) with different r for each encryption call.

How to make r distinct?
- Stateful encryption: r as counter / state ("complex" as control needed)
- Randomized. If r from {0, 1}^lambda then sufficiently small chance of conflict
- Delegate it: Use nonce

#### Construction

```
Let F PRF.
F: {0, 1}^lambda * {0, 1}^lambda-> {0, 1}^lambda

Sigma.M = {0, 1}^len
Sigma.C = 
Sigma.K = {0, 1}^lambda

Sigma.KeyGen:
  k <- Sigma.K
  ret k

Sigma.Enc(k, m):
  r <- {0, 1}^lambda
  x := F(k, r) XOR m

  return x, r

Sigma.Dec(k, r, x):
  Return F(k, r) XOR x
```

NB: Encryption can reveal r, as it is only used as parameter to the PRF - and
the attacker does *not* have access to the PRF's other parameter (namely the
key)

Hence it's likely also ok to use a 'predictable' (eg counting) r.

#### Lemma


If F is a secure PRF, the construction has CPA$-security.

Proof:
```
L_cpa$-real:
  k <- {0, 1}^lambda
  CTXT(m):
    r <- {0, 1}^lambda
    x := F(k, r) XOR m
    ret (r, x)

L_cpa$-rand:
  CTXT(m):
    r <- {0, 1}^lambda
    x <- {0, 1}^len

    ret(r, x)
```

1) r will repeat only with negligible probability
2) As r will 'never' repeat, F(k, r) will be indistinguishable from uniform distribution
3) uniform XOR bit string = uniform
4) Indistinguishable

Details in book.


# 8 Block ciphers in practice

- Block cipher is a PRP
- How to encrypt long messages? Block length of block cipher usually 128 bits /
  16 bytes.
- Mode of operation: Needed to implement CPA-secure encryption of
  arbitray-length inputs.
- Padding scheme: Allow encryption of inputs which are not multiples of block
  length.
