# Zero-knowledge proofs of knowledge

NB: Most not part of exam, only those parts which are in the script.

- Goal: Proving knowledge of secret without revealing the secret.
- EG: Where is Waldo. If mask with cut-out hole applied on top of picture you
  can prove that you know location of Waldo, without showing where Waldo is in
  context of the picture.

Here: Verifier knows y, prover knows x such that `g^x =-_p y`

Applications:
  - Identification protocol
  - Secure computation protocols to ensure robustness against malicious
    participants (eg prevent impersonation by party you're authenticating to)
  - Verifiable encryption (prove that you encrypted a certain something)
  - Anonymous credentials (eg prove only that above 18, without exposing exact age)


## Interactive proof of knowledge (PoK) of a discrete logarithm

- Prover `P`
- Verifier `V`
- Both known public statement `y`.
- Prover knows secret `x` such that `Psi(y, x) = True`
- V will output True/False depending on accepting the proof


### Properties

#### Completness

If P has input x such that `Psi(y, x) = True` then V accepts.

#### Soundness: 

For a 3-move protocol (sigma protocol, three messages exchanged in total) of
the form:
```
1) P - t -> V
2) P <- c - V
3) P - s -> V Phi(y, ...)?
```

There exists an efficient algorithm ('knowledge extractor') that, when given
two transcripts where V accepted `(t, c, s), (t, c', s'), c != c'`, can output
`x` with `Psi(y, x) = True`.


NB: We want this (even though it sounds 'bad') because of the 'knowledge' part
- need to be able to get the knowledge efficiently (?).

#### Zero-knowledge

V can simulate the transcript with P on its own (without knowing x), generating
the same distribution of messages. That is it could generate `(t, c, s)` with
the same distribution as in the real protocol.
But it will not be required to generate `t, c, s` in the same order as the
proof.

Perfect vs computational zero-knowledge: Distribution of messages (simulated vs
real) exchangable vs indistinguishable.

### ZK-PoK of discrete log

```
G = <g>
|G| = q
G in Z_p

P(x, y)                         V(y)
r <- Z_q                        
t := g^r     -----------------> 
             <----------------- c <- Z_q
s := r - cx  ----------------->
                                return t =-_p g^s * y^c
```

`r, t` commitment. `c` challenge. `s` response.

#### Completness
```
g^r = t = g^(r - cx) * y^c = g^(r - cx) * g^(xc) = g^r
```

#### Soundness

Given two transcripts `(t, c, s), (t, c', s'), c != c'` such that V accepts
both.
```
t = g^s g^c = g^s' g^c'
g^s g^(xc) = g^s' g^(xc')

=> 1 = g^(s' - s) g^(x(c' - c)) in G
=> g^(s - s') = g^(x(c' - c))
=> s - s' =-_q x(c' - c)
As c != c' => x =-_q (s - s')/(c' - c)

We know s, s', c, c', so can compute x.
```

#### Zero-knowledge

V can generate triples `(T, C, S)` for given `y` with the same distribution as
in an accepting real protocol execution:

```
C <- Z_q
S <- Z_q
T := g^S y^C
```

`(T, C, S)` has the *same* (interchangable) distribution as the `(t, c, s)`
transcript of an accepting proof. That is the honest proofer does not lose any
information due to the proof. Hence perfect zero-knowledge.


### Making a ZK-PoK non-interactive

- Interaction (order of generation of t, c, s) was crucial for soundness:
  ```
  1. t <- commit(y)
  2. c <- challenge(t)
  3. s <- response(y, x, t, c)
  ```
- When making it non-interactive, the order must be retained to prevent
  simulation (see zero-knowledge proof).
- Remove interaction by using a one-way function (here: hash function) on t to
  determine c.
- Called 'fiat-shamir' transformation, when one-way function is a hash function
  H modeled as a random oracle.

#### Recipe to turn interactive PoK into a signature scheme:

1) Start from PoK, which is 3-move protocol (eg Schnorr's identification
   protocol)
2) Add context (message m)
3) Apply Fiat-Shamir transformation, compute challenge `c := H(t || m)`
4) Output self-generated transcript of the ZKP
5) Verify with verification step of ZKP (act as `V` of protocol)
   NB in Schnorr: `t` not transmitted, can be recovered as `g^s * g^c`. Then
   `H(t || m) =? c`

### ZKP of one of two (not exam material)

Ie prove you know one or the other secret. (Logical or, not exclusive).

Idea: For proof which we know we prove correctly. For other one we simulate the
transcript.
