# Encryption modes


*PS*: Method of operation of CBC, other just in general

|                  | ECB | CBC | CTR | OFB |
| ---------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Secure           | No  | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| Encrypt parallel | -   | No  | No  | No  |
| Decrypt parallel | -   | Yes | Yes | No  |

## Length expansion

Ciphertext is correlated with plaintext size, but we also need to:
- Store initialization vector
- Pad plaintext if not block-aligned

Not applicable to counter mode, as there we XOR the encrypted counter, can
throw away the overhang.

### Relevancy

Length expansion is mostly irrelevant in communication scenario, as padding of
various types (headers, checksums, ...) present anyway, and protocols usually
support transparent packet fragmentation.

But relevancy for storage scenario, as transparent encryption layer can not be
naively between file system and disk, as it would have to write x bytes for
each x bytes received. IV or nonce needs to be stored someplace else.

Solution: Use nonce derived from address. Linux kernel: ESSIV, IV for sector is
IV := Enc(H(k), i) # i = Address of block.

### PKCS#7 padding

If 'n' bytes missing for full block, pad with n bytes, each containing the
value of 'n' - allows to recognize padding.

Side effect: Needs padding of one full padded block if plaintext fills block
fully, as else padding not recognizable.

# 9) Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement (Book: Chapter 13 (?))

## Modular arithmetic

- Integer division: For a, d in Z: Exists unique quotient q, remainder r, such
  that: `a = d * q + r`, and `0 <= r <= |d-1|`

- Since q, r are unique:
  - q = a div d = floor(a / d)
  - r = a mod d = a % d

- Relation 'divides': a | b IFF b mod a = 0

### Congruence relation

Notation: =- is triple equal (congruence)

`a =- b (mod m) or a =-_m b IFF m | (a - b)`

### Integers mod m

Z_m := {0, 1, ..., m - 1}

Note: a =-_m b != (a mod m = b mod m)

First is equivalence relation, second is equality over Z.

### Group

A group `<G, *, 1>` consists of a set `G`, an operation `*` and a neutral
element `1` such that:
1) For all a, b in G: `a * b in G`. That is G is closed in regards to the operation
2) For all a in G: `1 * a = a * 1 = a`
3) For all a in G: Exists a^-1 in G such that `a * a^-1 = 1`
4) (Assoc.)

#### Example

* `Z_m := <Z_m, +, 0>`
* `Z^*_p := <{1, 2, ..., p-1}, *, 1>`

### Cardinality / Order

`|G|` denotes the number of elements in G

### Cyclic group

A finite group G is cyclic if some g in G, called generator, exists such that
`G = {g^0, g^1, ...}`.

Notation: `<g> = G`, 'g generates G'

Integers mod m: `<g>_m c Z^*_m`

### Primitive root

- If `<g>_p = Z^*_p`, then g is a primitive root

### Examples `Z^*_{11}` "11 prime"
- `<1>_11 = {1}` # Cycle of length 1
- `<2>_11 = {1, 2, 4, 8, 5, 10, 9, 7, 3, 6}` # Cycle of length 10
- `<3>_11 = {1, 3, 9, 5, 4}` # Cycle of length 5

#### Construction of `<x>_11`

- 1st element: 1
- 2nd element: x * 1st element mod 11
- n-th element: x * (n-1)th element mod 11

### Order of group G

The number of elements in G is also called the order of G.

- The order of a in G is the smallest i such that `a^i = 1` (in G)
  (Smallest i such that `g^i =-_m 1`)

### Lemma

For all primitive roots g:
`g^a = g^b IFF a =-_{|G|} b`

### Example

* `Z^*_p`, p prime: `|Z^*_p| = p - 1`
* For q | (p-1), q prime, there is a cyclic group G of order q, defined by
  multiplication mod p.
  Think of:
    - `p = 2q + 1` (p called 'safe prime', q called Sophie-Germain prime, `|p| ~= 2000`)
    - `p = mq + 1`, `|q| ~= 256`

### Discrete logarithms

In a cyclic group G the discrete log of y in G with respect to a primitive root
g is defined as: `x in Z_{|G|} : g^x = y`

Note: This is assumed to be a hard problem, no efficient computation. Forms
basis of modern cryptography.

### Discrete logarithm problem (DLP)

Given `y <- G`, compute `x : g^x = y`.

Groups where the DLP is conjectured to be computationally hard:
- Prime-order subgroups of `Z^*_p`, p prime, `|p| ~= 2000`
- Groups defined over points on elliptic curves

## Diffie Hellman key agreement

Goal: To agree on pseudo-random key.

Alice         `G=<g>`, order q          Bob
`a <- Z_q`                              `b <- Z_q`
`X := g^a`    - exchange X, Y -         `Y := g^b`
`Z_A := Y^a`                            `Z_B := X^b`

Claim: `Z_A = Z_B * Z_A = Y^a = (g^b)^a = (g^a)^b = X^b = Z_B`

### Security

Communication is public but authenticated. Eve can listen in on public
information (X, Y, group), but not influence the messages.

- If Eve can compute DLP then it's not secure
- Otherwise Z_A = Z_B is a pseudo-random element from the group (indistinguishable in polynomial time)
  - nB Does not look like a random bit string, not directly suitable for eg
    OTP. But work exists to transform it.

### Key agreement protocol security

Protocol Pi generates a key in Pi.K and a transcript T in `{0, 1}^*`:
`(t, K) <- EXEC(Pi)`

K.A protocol Pi is secure if following two libraries are indistinguishable:

```
L^Pi_KA-Real:
  QUERY():
    (k, T) = EXEC(Pi)
    return (k, T)

L^Pi_KA-Rand
  QUERY():
    # Ensures correct probability distribution of T
    (k, T) = EXEC(Pi)
    k* <- Pi.K
    return (k*, T)
```


Linked to above (?): What does Eve see?
```
L^Pi_KA-Real:
  a <- Z_q
  b <- Z_q

  return (g^a, g^b, g^(a * b))

L^Pi_KA-Rand
  a <- Z_q
  b <- Z_q
  c <- Z_q

  return (g^a, g^b, g^c)
```

First two are transcript, last one is key. In case of L_Rand: Third one
independent of transcript.

Stronger assumption than "you can not compute discrete logarithms", or "you can
not compute the key".
